Add neopool integration documentation (#45990)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/neopool.markdown

ha_release: 2026.8
ha_iot_class: Local Polling
ha_config_flow: true
ha_codeowners:
  - "@svasek"
ha_domain: neopool
ha_platforms:
  - sensor
ha_integration_type: hub
ha_quality_scale: silver
ha_category:
  - Hub
---

The **NeoPool** {% term integration %} integrates pool controllers built around the **NeoPool control system** (originally developed by **Sugar Valley**, acquired by **Hayward** in 2016) with Home Assistant. It communicates entirely locally over Modbus TCP, providing real-time monitoring of water chemistry, filtration, and hydrolysis without any cloud dependency.

The same control system is sold under many brand names worldwide, including **Hidrolife**, **Aquascenic**, **Oxilife**, **Bionet**, **Hidroniser**, **UVScenic**, **Station**, and **Aquarite**, distributed by **Hayward**, **Brilix** (Albixon), **Bayrol**, **Certikin**, **Poolstar**, **GrupAquadirect**, **Pentair**, **ProducPool**, **Pool Technologie**, **Kripsol**, and others.

{% note %}
_VistaPool_ is the name of Hayward's mobile/web app for cloud-based pool management. The **NeoPool** integration works entirely locally via Modbus and does not require or use the VistaPool app or any cloud service.

> {% endnote %}

Reviewer: We can link to the device here IMO

Author: Excuse me, what do you mean by that?

{% include integrations/config_flow.md %}

### Configuration parameters

{% configuration_basic %}
Host:
  description: The hostname or IP address of your Modbus TCP gateway, for example `192.168.1.50` or `pool-gateway.local`.
Port:
  description: The TCP port of your Modbus gateway. Defaults to `502`.
Unit ID:
  description: The Modbus unit (server) ID of the NeoPool controller. Defaults to `1`.
Modbus framer:
  description: Protocol framer to use. `tcp` works for most gateways. Pick `rtu` only if your gateway forwards raw RTU frames over TCP.
{% endconfiguration_basic %}

## Supported functionality

The integration exposes the controller's runtime state as sensor entities. **Only entities backed by a detected hardware module or an enabled controller option are registered**; the rest stay hidden until the module or option becomes available. Each bullet below lists the specific requirement for that sensor.

### Sensors

- **Water temperature**: current pool water temperature (when the temperature sensor is present).
- **pH**: measured pH level (when the pH module is present).
- **Redox / ORP**: measured oxidation-reduction potential in mV (when the Redox module is present).

> - **Free chlorine**: measured chlorine concentration (when the chlorine module is present).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Salt level**: measured chlorine concentration (when the chlorine module is present).
```
I couldn't find this string. Is it Salt level now?

Author: Good catch. The `MBF_MEASURE_CL` register (0x0104) in the Sugar Valley Modbus spec measures **free chlorine concentration in ppm**, via an optional chlorine measurement module with FL2 flow probe. This docs page reflects that.

 The `"Salt level"` name currently in `strings.json` is almost certainly a bug from an earlier revision - it does not match what the register reports. Salt concentration is never measured directly by NeoPool; it can only be extrapolated from the hydrolysis cell voltage and current. I'll open a small follow-up code PR to rename the entity to `Free chlorine` so the UI matches this page. The `measure_cl` translation key stays.

- **Conductivity**: measured water conductivity (when the conductivity module is present).

> - **pH pump status**: current state of the pH dosing pump (off, idle, dosing acid, dosing base) (when the pH module is present).

Reviewer 2: Is **Both pumps** also a state?

Author: Good catch. Fixed - added "both pumps" and switched to the actual user-facing labels (`acid pump`, `base pump`) instead of the previous "dosing acid/base" phrasing.

- **pH alarm**: latched pH-regulation alarm state (when the pH module is present).
- **Hydrolysis intensity**: current production level in % (when the hydrolysis module is present).
- **Hydrolysis voltage**: current cell voltage (when the hydrolysis module is present; diagnostic, disabled by default).
- **Hydrolysis polarity**: current polarity of the electrolytic cell (when the hydrolysis module is present).
- **Ionization intensity**: current ionization level (when the ionization module is present).
- **Ionization polarity**: current polarity of the ionization electrodes (when the ionization module is present).
- **Filtration mode**: current mode reported by the controller (Manual, Auto, Heating, Smart, Intelligent, Backwash).
- **Filtration speed**: current variable-speed filtration percentage (when the controller reports a variable-speed pump).
- **Intelligent-mode intervals** and **time to next interval**: scheduling data for Intelligent mode (when a heating relay and temperature sensor are configured).
- **Backwash remaining**: time remaining in the active backwash cycle (when a Besgo automatic filter valve is configured).

> - **Cell runtime counters**: five diagnostic counters tracking wear on the electrolytic cell (when the hydrolysis module is present), total runtime, runtime since last reset, runtime in polarity 1 and 2, and polarity-change count. The "since reset" counter is enabled by default; the others are diagnostic and disabled by default.

Reviewer 2: is the counter still enabled by default?

Author: You're right - none of the five are enabled by default anymore. Updated the page to say all five are diagnostic and disabled by default, with a note that users can enable them in the entity registry if they want to track cell wear.

ha_release: 2026.7
ha_iot_class: Local Polling
ha_config_flow: true
ha_codeowners:
  - '@svasek'
ha_domain: neopool
ha_platforms:
  - binary_sensor
  - button
  - diagnostics
  - light
  - number
  - select
  - sensor
  - switch
ha_integration_type: hub
ha_quality_scale: platinum
ha_category:
  - Hub
---

The **NeoPool** {% term integration %} integrates pool controllers built around the **NeoPool control system** (originally developed by **Sugar Valley**, acquired by **Hayward** in 2016) with Home Assistant. It communicates entirely locally over Modbus TCP, providing real-time monitoring and control of water chemistry, filtration, lighting, heating, and auxiliary relays without any cloud dependency.

The same control system is sold under many brand names worldwide, including **Hidrolife**, **Aquascenic**, **Oxilife**, **Bionet**, **Hidroniser**, **UVScenic**, **Station**, and **Aquarite**, distributed by **Hayward**, **Brilix** (Albixon), **Bayrol**, **Certikin**, **Poolstar**, **GrupAquadirect**, **Pentair**, **ProducPool**, **Pool Technologie**, **Kripsol**, and others.

{% note %}

> _VistaPool_ is the name of Hayward's mobile/web app for cloud-based pool management. This integration works **entirely locally** via Modbus and does not require or use the VistaPool app or any cloud service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_VistaPool_ is the name of Hayward's mobile/web app for cloud-based pool management. The **NeoPool** integration works entirely locally via Modbus and does not require or use the VistaPool app or any cloud service.
```

- **Get notified of pool problems**: receive alerts when low-flow, sensor faults, or alarm conditions are detected.
- **Run seasonal automations**: enable winter mode automatically on a date, or pause polling entirely during the off-season while keeping all entities registered.
- **Control auxiliary relays**: manage pool lighting, heating, UV lamp, and up to four AUX relays with per-relay timer/period/mode entities.

## Supported devices

The integration supports any pool controller built on the NeoPool / Sugar Valley platform that exposes the standard Modbus register set, including:

- **Hayward**: Aquarite (with NeoPool option), Hidroniser, UVScenic, Station
- **Sugar Valley**: Hidrolife, Aquascenic, Oxilife, Bionet
- **Brilix** (Albixon), **Bayrol**, **Certikin**, **Poolstar**, **GrupAquadirect**, **Pentair**, **ProducPool**, **Pool Technologie**, **Kripsol**, and other regional rebrands of the same control system

The Modbus protocol implemented here follows the official _NeoPool Control System MODBUS Register description_ documentation by Sugar Valley.

## Prerequisites

Before setting up the NeoPool integration, make sure:

> - Your NeoPool controller is connected to a **Modbus TCP gateway** (any RS-485 to TCP converter, such as the USR-DR164) on your home network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Your NeoPool controller is connected to a Modbus TCP gateway (any RS-485 to TCP converter, such as the USR-DR164) on your home network.
```
We use [bold to markup UI strings](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/documenting/general-style-guide), not to highlight text. Please fix throughout the page.

> - The gateway is configured for **19200 baud, 1 stop bit, no parity, Modbus RTU**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The gateway is configured for 19200 baud, 1 stop bit, no parity, Modbus RTU.
```

- You know the **hostname or IP address** and **TCP port** of the gateway.
- The RS-485 wiring is connected to the controller's `WIFI` or `EXTERNAL` port (do **not** use `DISPLAY` unless the internal LCD is disconnected). The pinout (top to bottom) is:

  ```text
       ___
    1 |*  |– +12V (from internal power supply)
    2 |*  |– NC (not connected)
    3 |*  |– Modbus A+
    4 |*  |– Modbus B-
    5 |*__|– GND
  ```

  The connector is a standard 2.54 mm 5-pin PCB female header.

{% note %}

> The NeoPool device acts as a Modbus _server_ (slave), this integration is a Modbus _client_ (master). Only one Modbus client can be connected to a given Modbus connector at a time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The NeoPool device acts as a Modbus _server_, this integration is a Modbus _client_. Only one Modbus client can be connected to a given Modbus connector at a time.
```

{% endnote %}

{% include integrations/config_flow.md %}

> ### Configuration parameters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

{% configuration_basic %}
Host:

>   description: The hostname or IP address of your Modbus TCP gateway.

Reviewer 2: could you add an example of an IP and host name?

Port:
  description: The TCP port of your Modbus gateway. Defaults to `502`.
Slave ID:

>   description: The Modbus slave (unit) ID of the NeoPool controller. Defaults to `1`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Client ID:
  description: The Modbus client (unit) ID of the NeoPool controller. Defaults to `1`.
```
we avoid the master/slave terminology 
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/m/master-slave

Modbus framer:

>   description: Protocol framer to use. `tcp` works for most gateways; pick `rtu` only if your gateway forwards raw RTU frames over TCP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  description: Protocol framer to use. `tcp` works for most gateways. Pick `rtu` only if your gateway forwards raw RTU frames over TCP.
```

Filtration pump power:
  description: Rated wattage of the filtration pump. When non-zero, the integration creates instantaneous power and cumulative energy sensors usable in the [Energy dashboard](/docs/energy/). Set to `0` to disable.
Enable filtration timers 1/2/3:
  description: Create timer entities for the controller's three filtration schedules. Enable only the timers you actually use.

> Enable Pool Cover Sensor:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable pool cover sensor:
```
We use [sentence-style capitalization](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/capitalization), also for UI strings

  description: Create a binary sensor exposing the pool cover open/closed state.

> Enable Light Relay:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable light relay:
```

  description: Create entities to control and monitor the pool light relay.
{% endconfiguration_basic %}

> The above configuration can also be adjusted later via {% my integrations title="**Settings** > **Devices & services**" %}, click {% icon "mdi:dots-vertical" %} and select **Reconfigure**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above configuration can also be adjusted later. Go to {% my integrations title="**Settings** > **Devices & services**" %} > {% icon "mdi:dots-vertical" %} and select **Reconfigure**.
```

- **Filtration timers**: three independent automatic timers per day.
- **Filtration speed** (if variable-speed pump is supported).
- **Boost control**: Inactive, Normal, Hydro (if hydrolysis / electrolysis module present).
- **pH pump activation delay**.
- **Intelligent mode minimum filtration time** (if heating + temperature sensor present).
- **Backwash repeat interval** and **Backwash valve mode** (if Besgo valve configured).
- Per-relay **timer / period / mode** controls for AUX and Light relays.

### Buttons

- **Manual time sync**: push Home Assistant's time to the controller.
- **Reset alarm/error**: clear latched controller alarm states.
- **Start backwash**: manually start a backwash cycle (only if Besgo automatic filter valve is configured).
- **Reset cell runtime counter**: reset the hydrolysis cell user counters (if the hydrolysis module is present, disabled by default). The controller resets all user counters (cell partial, ION, and UV) together in one atomic operation; there is no per-counter button.

### Light

- **Pool light** with on/off control (and brightness/effect when supported by the relay configuration).

## Data updates

> The integration polls the controller over Modbus TCP at a fixed interval. Reads are batched into a small number of register requests to minimize bus load and the round-trip time per refresh.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The integration {% term polling polls %} the controller over Modbus TCP at a fixed interval. To stay responsive, the integration reads data from the controller in as few requests as possible per update cycle.
```
There's a [glossary term reference](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/documenting/general-style-guide#glossary-term-reference) for this term :book: .
This documentation is for end users. Is it needed to give so much implementation detail? Made a suggestion to rephrase this a bit.

> If a poll cycle fails (for example because the Modbus gateway becomes unreachable), the integration applies an **adaptive backoff** that grows up to three minutes between attempts, then drops back to the normal interval once the controller is reachable again. While in backoff, all entities transition to `unavailable` so automations can react to the loss of communication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a poll cycle fails (for example, because the Modbus gateway becomes unreachable), the integration applies an adaptive backoff that increases the interval between attempts to up to 3 minutes, then returns to the normal interval once the controller is reachable again. While in backoff, all entities transition to `unavailable` so automations can react to the loss of communication.
```

> The **winter mode** switch fully suspends polling for the off-season; the entities remain registered (so dashboards keep their layout), but no Modbus traffic is generated until winter mode is turned off again.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the **winter mode** switch is enabled, the integration stops communicating with the controller for the off-season. All entities remain available in your dashboards and automations, but no data is retrieved until winter mode is turned off again.
```

## Actions

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
The title is not needed here, as the include element already comes with a title:

<img width="1161" height="408" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1621d597-054f-47e6-bebf-a41fdbc5e2f0" />

{% endnote %}

{% include integrations/config_flow.md %}

### Configuration parameters

{% configuration_basic %}
Name:
  description: A custom identifier for your pool, used as a prefix in entity IDs (e.g. entering `Pool West` becomes `pool_west`).
Host:
  description: The hostname or IP address of your Modbus TCP gateway.
Port:
  description: The TCP port of your Modbus gateway. Defaults to `502`.
Slave ID:
  description: The Modbus slave (unit) ID of the NeoPool controller. Defaults to `1`.
{% endconfiguration_basic %}

The integration supports adding multiple NeoPool controllers — each as a separate config entry with its own prefix.

The above configuration can also be adjusted later via {% my integrations title="**Settings** > **Devices & services**" %}, click {% icon "mdi:dots-vertical" %} and select **Reconfigure**.

## Supported functionality

This integration provides device-class-aware entities for every feature exposed by the controller. Capability detection automatically hides entities for hardware modules that are not present (for example, hydrolysis-related entities are not registered if the hydrolysis module is absent).

### Sensors

> - **Water temperature** — current pool water temperature in °C / °F.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Water temperature**: Current pool water temperature in °C / °F.
```
Don't use em dashes. Use a colon instead. Please fix throughout the docs.

- **Filtration pump power** — instantaneous power draw in W (only when pump wattage is configured in the integration's options).
- **Filtration pump energy** — cumulative energy consumption in Wh / kWh, suitable for the [Energy dashboard](/docs/energy/).
- **Device time** — the controller's internal clock.
- **Hydrolysis cell runtime** — five counters that track wear on the electrolytic cell (if the hydrolysis module is present). The "since reset" counter is enabled by default; the cumulative total, the per-polarity runtime (polarity 1 / polarity 2), and the polarity-change count are diagnostic and disabled by default.

### Binary sensors

Around 50 binary sensors covering:

- **Relay states** — Filtration, Light, AUX1–AUX4, pH acid pump.
- **Module detection** — pH, Redox, Chlorine, Conductivity, Hydrolysis, Ionization modules present.
- **Regulation status** — pH, Redox, Chlorine, Conductivity, Hydrolysis regulation active.
- **Problem indicators** — low flow, pH/Redox sensor faults, time-sync drift, alarm conditions.
- **Heating** — heating relay active (if heating relay assigned).
- **UV lamp** — UV lamp active (if UV relay assigned).

> - **Pool cover** — cover open/closed (if cover sensor enabled).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
This will probably need to be moved into a new PR, to match a dedicated core PR.

### Numbers

- **pH setpoint**, **Redox setpoint**, **Chlorine setpoint**, **Temperature setpoint**.
- **Hydrolysis production setpoint** (if hydrolysis module is present).
- **Hydrolysis cover reduction %** (if hydrolysis module + cover sensor enabled).

> - **Hydrolysis shutdown temperature threshold** (if hydrolysis module + temperature sensor + cover sensor enabled).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
This will probably need to be moved into a new PR, to match a dedicated core PR.

### Switches

- **Manual filtration** — start/stop filtration manually.
- **Light** and **AUX1–AUX4** relay switches (can be enabled in options).
- **Automatic time sync** — keep the controller clock in sync with Home Assistant (disabled by default).
- **Winter mode** — suspends Modbus communication while keeping all entities registered.
- **Climate mode** (if heating relay + temperature sensor present).
- **Smart antifreeze** (if temperature sensor present).
- **UV mode** (if UV relay assigned).
- **Hydrolysis cover reduction enable** (if hydrolysis module + cover sensor enabled).

> - **Hydrolysis temperature shutdown enable** (if hydrolysis module + temperature sensor + cover sensor enabled).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
This will probably need to be moved into a new PR, to match a dedicated core PR.

### Selects

- **Filtration mode** — Manual, Auto, Heating, Smart, Intelligent, Backwash (Backwash auto-enabled if Besgo valve configured).
- **Filtration timers** — three independent automatic timers per day.
- **Filtration speed** (if variable-speed pump is supported).
- **Boost control** — Inactive, Normal, Hydro (if hydrolysis / electrolysis module present).
- **pH pump activation delay**.
- **Intelligent mode minimum filtration time** (if heating + temperature sensor present).
- **Backwash repeat interval** and **Backwash valve mode** (if Besgo valve configured).
- Per-relay **timer / period / mode** controls for AUX and Light relays.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
This will probably need to be moved into a new PR, to match a dedicated core PR.

### Buttons

- **Manual time sync** — push Home Assistant's time to the controller.
- **Reset alarm/error** — clear latched controller alarm states.
- **Start backwash** — manually start a backwash cycle (only if Besgo automatic filter valve is configured).

> - **Reset cell runtime counter** — reset the hydrolysis cell user counters (if the hydrolysis module is present, disabled by default). The controller resets all user counters — cell partial, ION, and UV — together in one atomic operation; there is no per-counter button.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
This will probably need to be moved into a new PR, to match a dedicated core PR.

### Light

> - **Pool light** with on/off control (and brightness/effect when supported by the relay configuration).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
This will probably need to be moved into a new PR, to match a dedicated core PR.
